# Cloud Transformation
Cloud transformation is about tools and technology. It’s often IT-led (though it should involve business stakeholders too) and so it’s the domain where us techies are most happy. Often, it involves creating new platforms, using cloud services – Azure, Amazon Web Services, Office 365, G-Suite, Dynamics 365, Salesforce. But cloud transformation is just an enabler. In order to deliver value, [business transformation](business-tx.md) is required.

## What do we mean by "Cloud"?
In the early 2010s, everything was trying to be cloudy. If you ran a server in a datacentre and provided services to others (an application service provider), you probably said you were "on the cloud". These were the wild west days of cloud computing. A farm of virtual machines became "a private cloud", regardless of how they were managed and operated. 

Thankfully, the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) wrote a short paper, which should be required reading for anyone getting their head around cloud computing. [The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/legacy/sp/nistspecialpublication800-145.pdf) defines the concepts we all settled on:

- The essential characteristics of cloud computing: on-demand self service; broad network access; resource pooling; rapid elasticity; and measured service.
- The service models: infrastructure-; platform-; and software-as-a-service (IaaS, PaaS and SaaS).
- The deployment models: public; private; community; and hybrid clouds.

## Moving to cloud is not the same as cloud transformation
A lot of my views on cloud is based on examples where organisations don't transform. Lift and shift is not cloud transformation. If you want to save money by moving to AWS or Azure, but without changing your working practices, you're in for a shock.

A former colleague, Colin Hughes, and I used to tell our clients that you can either transform as part of the programme, or afterwards. The timing will depend on the motivations - if you have an impending deadline (for example for a datacentre exit), then the temptation is just to lift and shift. But you must have that second phase of funded activity - to transform the estate - otherwise you will be left with big bills and wondering if you did the right thing. In fact, there's a perfect case study in this: in October 2022, [David Heinemeier Hanson wrote about how his company, 37 Signals, was leaving the cloud](https://world.hey.com/dhh/why-we-re-leaving-the-cloud-654b47e0). It seems to me, if they were renting servers for a decade. They never refactored the applications to take advantage of cloud native capablities.

## Does cloud have tangible benefits?
I asked a question of two people I respect a lot in this industry - Chris Weston and Matt Ballantine - on their WB-40 podcast [episode 271](https://wb40podcast.com/2023/09/11/271-ask-wb-40/). The question was not entirely clear in the way it was posed and the answer is a bit of a ramble - I don't even agree with all of it - but it contains some interesting points:

> "Mark: I think that selling cloud transformation on cost savings alone is dangerous, because it often costs more. But what tangible benefits have you seen from organisations making the journey to the cloud, or is it all non-tangible things like burstability?
> 
> Matt: Okay, so first of all I would say that burstability and flexibility, whilst weird language, are very tangible and anybody who has seen their website go down because of their inability to be able to service all of the users at any given time will know absolutely what the tangible result of not being able to burst capacity of what you’re doing might be like. Interestingly, one of my colleagues has just published a blog talking around how, I think, it’s a two second page load time is the limit at which you start to see massive drop-off of people being able to complete transactions on e-commerce sites and that again is a question about burstability being able to get the capacity when you need it as you need it to go to support customers when they’re coming. So there some things there that are quite tangible.
> 
> I think though, that the question about why is it an advantage I have seen and I have implemented plenty of advantage in moving to cloud based services because in medium-sized organisations it's meant that I just haven’t had to have a load of skills that we never really had any way in managing infrastructure. By being able to take out a swathe of risk associated with unpatched and unupdated stuff that was Internet-facing that really we didn’t know what we were doing as we didn’t have the money to be able to properly fund the people that are necessary to do it. That for me in the medium to large, medium organisations is the single most compelling business benefit of all of this stuff. You turn a whole load of things you used to care about worry about into black boxes that you no longer need to care and so not having to care about low-level security concerns, not having to care about management of hardware, and heating, and air conditioning, and power, and... and... and... and back ups, and... and... and - and it just being somebody else’s problem and the people whose other problem it is now having the scale and capability and capacity to be able to do it properly. That is the single biggest cost... and actually when you then think about the cost implications of all of that what you often find is, it’s way cheaper doing a lot of these things in cloud because you never were properly funding how you did it before. Take something like email as an example of that - you just you didn’t have the people to go to manage it properly. Which is why email used to go down regularly.
> 
> Chris: Yeah all of that, completely agree with all of that. I do think removing that destraction of the data centre that one day has to be replaced or created or whatever is definitely a tangible benefit. But I will also say that one of the things that we do a lot in our business is legacy modernisation and what it is currently right now is called digital transformation. People say what's digital transformation, well digital transformation for me is when you realise that your business organisation, needs a certain capability that your current tech stack just can't provide because it hasn't kept up with your competitors, you haven’t made the right decisions for whatever reason along the way and you found yourself in a place where you need to make a leap - a technological leap so that might be a "well we need to rewrite this software", "we need to re-platform", "we need to create...". A bank's a great example, right where suddenly they found that they needed to do the things that the challenger banks were doing like providing apps with instant access to the balances, so you go into your app and you can see what your balance is. In the old banks, for the old technology that the balance sits on a mainframe somewhere and in order to get that balance to a system that can talk to a mobile app that takes quite some engineering at the back end and it comes to a point where so much stuff is then being done in the app that you just can’t maintain this sort of ramshackle kind of mouse trap style technology that gets you from one place to another. 
> 
> The thing about cloud services is and this is different from just doing lift and shift of infrastructure to infrastructure as a service on cloud to more about the development on the cloud using platform as a service etc. is that you are always benefiting from the billions of dollars of research that’s been put in to lots of different products by various vendors and by Microsoft etc. because it’s always being updated and if you want to stay  competitive and again, I think that cloud versus on-prem debate goes back to a time, not so long ago when we used to get a CD with some software in it, put it onto a server and then that that’s your server and the argument about cloud was well "Is it your shit in your data centre or is it your shit in someone elses datacentre?". Well now it’s just it’s not shit anymore it’s it’s the whole thing, it's everything so not just how much do you want to be able to make it that it’s not just going to change when the next CD comes out in a years time or whatever - it’s going to constantly evolve, and if you’re gonna do that you really are going to need to have the latest tech available to you in terms of the platform. 
> 
> So yeah those are for me those are tangible benefits that show and provide capability to a business that they just don’t have on prem and I’m not saying on prem and cloud it’s always cloud and cloud‘s a no brainer. It’s not always the case, but if you ignore those things which are genuine benefits of being in the cloud then you're really not asking the right questions. 
> 
> Matt: interestingly as well, one of the clients I’ve been working with recently - they work in the financial services industry - and they produce software for banks that need to be installed because of security into banks' data centres and it’s really interesting how the skill of developing software to be distributed for installation into a behind firewall data centre is an extremely rare skill - these days people don’t know how to do it anymore. They know how to build a build for cloud, they know how to build a build for app stores. They maybe know how to be able to build to be able to distribute in containerised cloud things which can be implemented into private clouds for the idea of what was the exe installer for server software. There's very few people who know how to do that anymore because nobody does it anymore and that’s been a really interesting revelation for me at just quite how much things have moved on."

[Go home](README.md)
